README.md, before:

# Baseline firmware for the [Warp](https://github.com/physical-computation/Warp-hardware) family of hardware platforms
This is the firmware for the [Warp hardware](https://github.com/physical-computation/Warp-hardware) and its publicly available and unpublished derivatives. This firmware also runs on the Freescale/NXP FRDM KL03 evaluation board which we use for teaching at the University of Cambridge. When running on platforms other than Warp, only the sensors available in the corresponding hardware platform are accessible.

**Prerequisites:** You need an arm cross-compiler such as `arm-none-eabi-gcc` installed as well as a working `cmake` (installed, e.g., via `apt-get` on Linux or via [MacPorts](https://www.macports.org) on macOS). On Ubuntu, the package you need is `gcc-arm-none-eabi`. You will also need an installed copy of the SEGGER [JLink commander](https://www.segger.com/downloads/jlink/), `JlinkExe`, which is available for Linux, macOS, and Windows (here are direct links for downloading it for [macOS](https://www.segger.com/downloads/jlink/JLink_MacOSX.pkg), and [Linux tgz 64-bit](https://www.segger.com/downloads/jlink/JLink_Linux_x86_64.tgz)).

## 1.  Compiling the Warp firmware
First, edit [setup.conf](setup.conf) to set the variable `ARMGCC_DIR` and `JLINKPATH`. If your `arm-none-eabi-gcc` is in `/usr/local/bin/arm-none-eabi-gcc`, then you want to set  `ARMGCC_DIR` to `/usr/local`. In the following, this `README.md` will refer to the top of the repository as `$TREEROOT`. On some platforms, you might need to also, in addition, set the `ARMGCC_DIR` environment variable in your shell (using `setenv` or `export` as appropriate), to point to the same path as you set in [setup.conf](setup.conf).

Second, edit [`tools/scripts/glaux.jlink.commands`](tools/scripts/glaux.jlink.commands) and [`tools/scripts/warp.jlink.commands`](tools/scripts/warp.jlink.commands) to replace `<full-path-to-warp-firmware>` with the full path to your Warp firmware directory.

Third, build the Warp firmware by

	make warp

Fourth, load the Warp firmware to hardware by

	make load-warp

To build for the Glaux variant, use `make glaux` and `make load-glaux` in steps three and four instead.

The build process copies files from `src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/` into the `build/`, builds, and converts the binary to SREC. See `Warp/src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/README.md` for more. _When editing source, edit the files in `src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/`, not the files in `build` location, since the latter are overwritten during each build._

To connect to the running hardware to see output, you will need two terminal windows. In a separate shell window from the one in which you ran `make load-warp` (or its variants), launch the JLink RTT client<sup>&nbsp;<a href="#Notes">See note 1 below</a></sup>:

	JLinkRTTClient

## 2. Using the Warp firmware on the Freescale FRDMKL03 Board
The SEGGER firmware allows you to use SEGGER’s JLink software to load your own firmware to the board, even without using their specialized JLink programming cables. You can find the SEGGER firmware at the SEGGER Page for [OpenSDA firmware](https://www.segger.com/products/debug-probes/j-link/models/other-j-links/opensda-sda-v2/).

To build the Warp firmware for the FRDM KL03, you will need to modify [this line in `src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/config.h`](https://github.com/physical-computation/Warp-firmware/blob/9e7f9e5e3f3c039cc98cbd1e6dfeb6b8fd78c86a/src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/config.h#L55).


## 3.  Editing the firmware
The firmware is currently all in `src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/`, in particular, see `src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/warp-kl03-ksdk1.1-boot.c` and the per-sensor drivers in `src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/dev*.[c,h]`.

The firmware builds on the Kinetis SDK. You can find more documentation on the Kinetis SDK in the document [doc/Kinetis SDK v.1.1 API Reference Manual.pdf](https://github.com/physical-computation/Warp-firmware/blob/master/doc/Kinetis%20SDK%20v.1.1%20API%20Reference%20Manual.pdf).

The firmware is designed for the Warp and Glaux hardware platforms, but will also run on the Freescale FRDM KL03 development board. In that case, the only sensor driver which is relevant is the one for the MMA8451Q. For more details about the structure of the firmware, see [src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/README.md](src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/README.md).

## 4.  Interacting with the boot menu
When the firmware boots, you will be dropped into a menu with a rich set of commands. The Warp boot menu allows you to conduct most of the experiments you will likely need without modifying the firmware:
````
[ *				W	a	r	p	(rev. b)			* ]
[  				      Cambridge / Physcomplab   				  ]

	Supply=0mV,	Default Target Read Register=0x00
	I2C=200kb/s,	SPI=200kb/s,	UART=1kb/s,	I2C Pull-Up=32768

	SIM->SCGC6=0x20000001		RTC->SR=0x10		RTC->TSR=0x5687132B
	MCG_C1=0x42			MCG_C2=0x00		MCG_S=0x06
	MCG_SC=0x00			MCG_MC=0x00		OSC_CR=0x00
	SMC_PMPROT=0x22			SMC_PMCTRL=0x40		SCB->SCR=0x00
	PMC_REGSC=0x00			SIM_SCGC4=0xF0000030	RTC->TPR=0xEE9

	0s in RTC Handler to-date,	0 Pmgr Errors
Select:
- 'a': set default sensor.
- 'b': set I2C baud rate.
- 'c': set SPI baud rate.
- 'd': set UART baud rate.
- 'e': set default register address.
- 'f': write byte to sensor.
- 'g': set default SSSUPPLY.
- 'h': powerdown command to all sensors.
- 'i': set pull-up enable value.
- 'j': repeat read reg 0x00 on sensor #3.
- 'k': sleep until reset.
- 'l': send repeated byte on I2C.
- 'm': send repeated byte on SPI.
- 'n': enable SSSUPPLY.
- 'o': disable SSSUPPLY.
- 'p': switch to VLPR mode.
- 'r': switch to RUN mode.
- 's': power up all sensors.
- 't': dump processor state.
- 'u': set I2C address.
- 'x': disable SWD and spin for 10 secs.
- 'z': dump all sensors data.
Enter selection>
````
### Double echo characters
By default on Unix, you will likely see characters you enter shown twice. To avoid this, do the following:
- Make sure you are running `bash` (and not `csh`)
- Execute `stty -echo` at the command line in the terminal window in which you will run the `JLinkRTTClient`.

### Introduction to using the menu
You can probe around the menu to figure out what to do. In brief, you will likely want:

1. Menu item `b` to set the I2C baud rate.

2. Menu item `r` to switch the processor from low-power mode (2MHz) to "run" mode (48MHz).

3. Menu item `g` to set sensor supply voltage.

4. Menu item `n` to turn on the voltage regulators.

5. Menu item `z` to repeatedly read from all the sensors whose drivers are compiled into the build.

*NOTE: In many cases, the menu expects you to type a fixed number of characters (e.g., 0000 or 0009 for zero and nine)<sup>&nbsp;<a href="#Notes">See note 1 below</a></sup>. If using the `JLinkRTTClient`, the menu interface eats your characters as you type them, and you should not hit RETURN after typing in text. On the other hand, if using `telnet` you have to hit return.*

If you see repeated characters, you can set your terminal to not echo typed characters using `stty -echo`.

### Example 1: Dump all registers for a single sensor
-	`b` (set the I2C baud rate to `0300` for 300 kb/s).
-	`g` (set sensor supply voltage to `3000` for 3000mV sensor supply voltage).
-	`n` (turn on the sensor supply regulators).
-	`j` (submenu for initiating a fixed number of repeated reads from a sensor):
````
Enter selection> j

    Auto-increment from base address 0x01? ['0' | '1']> 0
    Chunk reads per address (e.g., '1')> 1
    Chatty? ['0' | '1']> 1
    Inter-operation spin delay in milliseconds (e.g., '0000')> 0000
    Repetitions per address (e.g., '0000')> 0000
    Maximum voltage for adaptive supply (e.g., '0000')> 2500
    Reference byte for comparisons (e.g., '3e')> 00
````

### Example 2: Stream data from all sensors
This will perpetually stream data from the 90+ sensor dimensions at a rate of about 90-tuples per second. Use the following command sequence:
-	`b` (set the I2C baud rate to `0300` for 300 kb/s).
-	`r` (enable 48MHz "run" mode for the processor).
-	`g` (set sensor supply voltage to `3000` for 3000mV sensor supply voltage).
-	`n` (turn on the sensor supply regulators).
-	`z` (start to stream data from all sensors that can run at the chosen voltage and baud rate).

## 5.  To update your fork
From your local clone:

	git remote add upstream https://github.com/physical-computation/Warp-firmware.git
	git fetch upstream
	git pull upstream master

----

### If you use Warp in your research, please cite it as:
Phillip Stanley-Marbell and Martin Rinard. “A Hardware Platform for Efficient Multi-Modal Sensing with Adaptive Approximation”. ArXiv e-prints (2018). arXiv:1804.09241.

**BibTeX:**
```
@ARTICLE{1804.09241,
	author = {Stanley-Marbell, Phillip and Rinard, Martin},
	title = {A Hardware Platform for Efficient Multi-Modal 
	Sensing with Adaptive Approximation},
	journal = {ArXiv e-prints},
	archivePrefix = {arXiv},
	eprint = {1804.09241},
	year = 2018,
}
```
Phillip Stanley-Marbell and Martin Rinard. “Warp: A Hardware Platform for Efficient Multi-Modal Sensing with Adaptive Approximation”. IEEE Micro, Volume 40 , Issue 1 , Jan.-Feb. 2020.

**BibTeX:**
```
@ARTICLE{8959350,
	author = {P. {Stanley-Marbell} and M. {Rinard}},
	title = {Warp: A Hardware Platform for Efficient Multi-Modal
	Sensing with Adaptive Approximation},
	journal = {IEEE Micro},
	year = {2020},
	volume = {40},
	number = {1},
	pages = {57-66},
	ISSN = {1937-4143},
	month = {Jan},
}
```
### Acknowledgements
This research is supported by an Alan Turing Institute award TU/B/000096 under EPSRC grant EP/N510129/1, by Royal Society grant RG170136, and by EPSRC grants EP/P001246/1 and EP/R022534/1.

----
### Notes
<sup>1</sup>&nbsp; On some Unix platforms, the `JLinkRTTClient` has a double echo of characters you type in. You can prevent this by configuring your terminal program to not echo the characters you type. To achieve this on `bash`, use `stty -echo` from the terminal. Alternatively, rather than using the `JLinkRTTClient`, you can use a `telnet` program: `telnet localhost 19021`. This avoids the JLink RTT Client's "double echo" behavior but you will then need a carriage return (&crarr;) for your input to be sent to the board. Also see [Python SEGGER RTT library from Square, Inc.](https://github.com/square/pylink/blob/master/examples/rtt.py) (thanks to [Thomas Garry](https://github.com/tidge27) for the pointer).

Commit message:

Add README and Octave files for submission

README.md, after:

# Low-Cost CO2 monitor
Based on FRDM-KL03Z on Warp Firmware, using MQ-135 gas sensor, BME280 TPH sensor, Adafruit OLED (SSD1331) and Infineon 
PASCO2 CO2 sensor.

This project seeks to evaluate the use of the MQ-135 low-cost gas sensor alongside the BME280 TPH sensor as a means of
estimating the CO2 concentration in the atmosphere. The PASCO2 is used as a reference measure for CO2. A simple 
multivariate regression model using the TPH, MQ-135 readings is used as default, and when the BME280 is unavailable, a 
univariate model using just MQ-135 readings is used.

Directory `octave-script` contains the Octave/Matlab script `mq135_regression.m` and data used to make the models.
Sensors are added using the Warp template as `devBME280.c/h` etc.

Andrew Salkeld (ajs327@cam.ac.uk), Fitzwilliam College.

Old Warp Firmware README replicated below (so the diff isn't too big!).
# Baseline firmware for the [Warp](https://github.com/physical-computation/Warp-hardware) family of hardware platforms
This is the firmware for the [Warp hardware](https://github.com/physical-computation/Warp-hardware) and its publicly available and unpublished derivatives. This firmware also runs on the Freescale/NXP FRDM KL03 evaluation board which we use for teaching at the University of Cambridge. When running on platforms other than Warp, only the sensors available in the corresponding hardware platform are accessible.

**Prerequisites:** You need an arm cross-compiler such as `arm-none-eabi-gcc` installed as well as a working `cmake` (installed, e.g., via `apt-get` on Linux or via [MacPorts](https://www.macports.org) on macOS). On Ubuntu, the package you need is `gcc-arm-none-eabi`. You will also need an installed copy of the SEGGER [JLink commander](https://www.segger.com/downloads/jlink/), `JlinkExe`, which is available for Linux, macOS, and Windows (here are direct links for downloading it for [macOS](https://www.segger.com/downloads/jlink/JLink_MacOSX.pkg), and [Linux tgz 64-bit](https://www.segger.com/downloads/jlink/JLink_Linux_x86_64.tgz)).

## 1.  Compiling the Warp firmware
First, edit [setup.conf](setup.conf) to set the variable `ARMGCC_DIR` and `JLINKPATH`. If your `arm-none-eabi-gcc` is in `/usr/local/bin/arm-none-eabi-gcc`, then you want to set  `ARMGCC_DIR` to `/usr/local`. In the following, this `README.md` will refer to the top of the repository as `$TREEROOT`. On some platforms, you might need to also, in addition, set the `ARMGCC_DIR` environment variable in your shell (using `setenv` or `export` as appropriate), to point to the same path as you set in [setup.conf](setup.conf).

Second, edit [`tools/scripts/glaux.jlink.commands`](tools/scripts/glaux.jlink.commands) and [`tools/scripts/warp.jlink.commands`](tools/scripts/warp.jlink.commands) to replace `<full-path-to-warp-firmware>` with the full path to your Warp firmware directory.

Third, build the Warp firmware by

	make warp

Fourth, load the Warp firmware to hardware by

	make load-warp

To build for the Glaux variant, use `make glaux` and `make load-glaux` in steps three and four instead.

The build process copies files from `src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/` into the `build/`, builds, and converts the binary to SREC. See `Warp/src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/README.md` for more. _When editing source, edit the files in `src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/`, not the files in `build` location, since the latter are overwritten during each build._

To connect to the running hardware to see output, you will need two terminal windows. In a separate shell window from the one in which you ran `make load-warp` (or its variants), launch the JLink RTT client<sup>&nbsp;<a href="#Notes">See note 1 below</a></sup>:

	JLinkRTTClient

## 2. Using the Warp firmware on the Freescale FRDMKL03 Board
The SEGGER firmware allows you to use SEGGER’s JLink software to load your own firmware to the board, even without using their specialized JLink programming cables. You can find the SEGGER firmware at the SEGGER Page for [OpenSDA firmware](https://www.segger.com/products/debug-probes/j-link/models/other-j-links/opensda-sda-v2/).

To build the Warp firmware for the FRDM KL03, you will need to modify [this line in `src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/config.h`](https://github.com/physical-computation/Warp-firmware/blob/9e7f9e5e3f3c039cc98cbd1e6dfeb6b8fd78c86a/src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/config.h#L55).


## 3.  Editing the firmware
The firmware is currently all in `src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/`, in particular, see `src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/warp-kl03-ksdk1.1-boot.c` and the per-sensor drivers in `src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/dev*.[c,h]`.

The firmware builds on the Kinetis SDK. You can find more documentation on the Kinetis SDK in the document [doc/Kinetis SDK v.1.1 API Reference Manual.pdf](https://github.com/physical-computation/Warp-firmware/blob/master/doc/Kinetis%20SDK%20v.1.1%20API%20Reference%20Manual.pdf).

The firmware is designed for the Warp and Glaux hardware platforms, but will also run on the Freescale FRDM KL03 development board. In that case, the only sensor driver which is relevant is the one for the MMA8451Q. For more details about the structure of the firmware, see [src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/README.md](src/boot/ksdk1.1.0/README.md).

## 4.  Interacting with the boot menu
When the firmware boots, you will be dropped into a menu with a rich set of commands. The Warp boot menu allows you to conduct most of the experiments you will likely need without modifying the firmware:
````
[ *				W	a	r	p	(rev. b)			* ]
[  				      Cambridge / Physcomplab   				  ]

	Supply=0mV,	Default Target Read Register=0x00
	I2C=200kb/s,	SPI=200kb/s,	UART=1kb/s,	I2C Pull-Up=32768

	SIM->SCGC6=0x20000001		RTC->SR=0x10		RTC->TSR=0x5687132B
	MCG_C1=0x42			MCG_C2=0x00		MCG_S=0x06
	MCG_SC=0x00			MCG_MC=0x00		OSC_CR=0x00
	SMC_PMPROT=0x22			SMC_PMCTRL=0x40		SCB->SCR=0x00
	PMC_REGSC=0x00			SIM_SCGC4=0xF0000030	RTC->TPR=0xEE9

	0s in RTC Handler to-date,	0 Pmgr Errors
Select:
- 'a': set default sensor.
- 'b': set I2C baud rate.
- 'c': set SPI baud rate.
- 'd': set UART baud rate.
- 'e': set default register address.
- 'f': write byte to sensor.
- 'g': set default SSSUPPLY.
- 'h': powerdown command to all sensors.
- 'i': set pull-up enable value.
- 'j': repeat read reg 0x00 on sensor #3.
- 'k': sleep until reset.
- 'l': send repeated byte on I2C.
- 'm': send repeated byte on SPI.
- 'n': enable SSSUPPLY.
- 'o': disable SSSUPPLY.
- 'p': switch to VLPR mode.
- 'r': switch to RUN mode.
- 's': power up all sensors.
- 't': dump processor state.
- 'u': set I2C address.
- 'x': disable SWD and spin for 10 secs.
- 'z': dump all sensors data.
Enter selection>
````
### Double echo characters
By default on Unix, you will likely see characters you enter shown twice. To avoid this, do the following:
- Make sure you are running `bash` (and not `csh`)
- Execute `stty -echo` at the command line in the terminal window in which you will run the `JLinkRTTClient`.

### Introduction to using the menu
You can probe around the menu to figure out what to do. In brief, you will likely want:

1. Menu item `b` to set the I2C baud rate.

2. Menu item `r` to switch the processor from low-power mode (2MHz) to "run" mode (48MHz).

3. Menu item `g` to set sensor supply voltage.

4. Menu item `n` to turn on the voltage regulators.

5. Menu item `z` to repeatedly read from all the sensors whose drivers are compiled into the build.

*NOTE: In many cases, the menu expects you to type a fixed number of characters (e.g., 0000 or 0009 for zero and nine)<sup>&nbsp;<a href="#Notes">See note 1 below</a></sup>. If using the `JLinkRTTClient`, the menu interface eats your characters as you type them, and you should not hit RETURN after typing in text. On the other hand, if using `telnet` you have to hit return.*

If you see repeated characters, you can set your terminal to not echo typed characters using `stty -echo`.

### Example 1: Dump all registers for a single sensor
-	`b` (set the I2C baud rate to `0300` for 300 kb/s).
-	`g` (set sensor supply voltage to `3000` for 3000mV sensor supply voltage).
-	`n` (turn on the sensor supply regulators).
-	`j` (submenu for initiating a fixed number of repeated reads from a sensor):
````
Enter selection> j

    Auto-increment from base address 0x01? ['0' | '1']> 0
    Chunk reads per address (e.g., '1')> 1
    Chatty? ['0' | '1']> 1
    Inter-operation spin delay in milliseconds (e.g., '0000')> 0000
    Repetitions per address (e.g., '0000')> 0000
    Maximum voltage for adaptive supply (e.g., '0000')> 2500
    Reference byte for comparisons (e.g., '3e')> 00
````

### Example 2: Stream data from all sensors
This will perpetually stream data from the 90+ sensor dimensions at a rate of about 90-tuples per second. Use the following command sequence:
-	`b` (set the I2C baud rate to `0300` for 300 kb/s).
-	`r` (enable 48MHz "run" mode for the processor).
-	`g` (set sensor supply voltage to `3000` for 3000mV sensor supply voltage).
-	`n` (turn on the sensor supply regulators).
-	`z` (start to stream data from all sensors that can run at the chosen voltage and baud rate).

## 5.  To update your fork
From your local clone:

	git remote add upstream https://github.com/physical-computation/Warp-firmware.git
	git fetch upstream
	git pull upstream master

----

### If you use Warp in your research, please cite it as:
Phillip Stanley-Marbell and Martin Rinard. “A Hardware Platform for Efficient Multi-Modal Sensing with Adaptive Approximation”. ArXiv e-prints (2018). arXiv:1804.09241.

**BibTeX:**
```
@ARTICLE{1804.09241,
	author = {Stanley-Marbell, Phillip and Rinard, Martin},
	title = {A Hardware Platform for Efficient Multi-Modal 
	Sensing with Adaptive Approximation},
	journal = {ArXiv e-prints},
	archivePrefix = {arXiv},
	eprint = {1804.09241},
	year = 2018,
}
```
Phillip Stanley-Marbell and Martin Rinard. “Warp: A Hardware Platform for Efficient Multi-Modal Sensing with Adaptive Approximation”. IEEE Micro, Volume 40 , Issue 1 , Jan.-Feb. 2020.

**BibTeX:**
```
@ARTICLE{8959350,
	author = {P. {Stanley-Marbell} and M. {Rinard}},
	title = {Warp: A Hardware Platform for Efficient Multi-Modal
	Sensing with Adaptive Approximation},
	journal = {IEEE Micro},
	year = {2020},
	volume = {40},
	number = {1},
	pages = {57-66},
	ISSN = {1937-4143},
	month = {Jan},
}
```
### Acknowledgements
This research is supported by an Alan Turing Institute award TU/B/000096 under EPSRC grant EP/N510129/1, by Royal Society grant RG170136, and by EPSRC grants EP/P001246/1 and EP/R022534/1.

----
### Notes
<sup>1</sup>&nbsp; On some Unix platforms, the `JLinkRTTClient` has a double echo of characters you type in. You can prevent this by configuring your terminal program to not echo the characters you type. To achieve this on `bash`, use `stty -echo` from the terminal. Alternatively, rather than using the `JLinkRTTClient`, you can use a `telnet` program: `telnet localhost 19021`. This avoids the JLink RTT Client's "double echo" behavior but you will then need a carriage return (&crarr;) for your input to be sent to the board. Also see [Python SEGGER RTT library from Square, Inc.](https://github.com/square/pylink/blob/master/examples/rtt.py) (thanks to [Thomas Garry](https://github.com/tidge27) for the pointer).
